Flutter is Google's UI toolkit for
building beautiful, natively compiled
applications for mobile, web, desktop, and
embedded devices from a single codebase.
That's the official definition.
And the first thing that we think is,
why is Google doing this?
Because Google has Android, and
they also have UI toolkit there.
I mean,
the Android team is using now Kotlin.
And they have Jetpack Compose, and
they have also ways to great Android apps.
And they did this, they did Flutter.
Well, Google,
it's not actually one company,
it's like a universe of
smaller companies inside.
And sometimes they are even
competing with each other, okay?
Well, this is one case.
Flutter can create Android apps,
as well as the other toolkits that
they have within the company.
But also it can create apps for iOS, and
also for desktop, and also for the web.
So it's a framework that they created for
more purposes, okay?
It's a declarative UI framework.
So we are not going to create buttons and
everything, like in creating
a variable button and
then we are attaching
the button with the DOM API.
We are not creating a DOM element and
then appending that element into the DOM,
that's not how it works.
It looks more than React,
than Swift UI, Jetpack Compose,
Angular, where we declare the code,
the UI, directly in one sentence,
in one expression,
everything is one expression, okay?
It was launched in 2018, and
it focused on modern UI patterns
such as a single source of truth.
The idea is that in your, for
now, let's say hierarchy,
that we all know exactly what that means.
But the data resides only in one place,
composable components.
So actually we can create
components that the name
that we are going to use here is widgets,
so we are going to compose widgets
that we can reuse within our project.
It's multiplatform, we already
mentioned that a couple of time.
Dependency rendering, so actually, your
widgets we have dependencies on variables,
on properties, on states, that will define
how your widgets are being rendered.
We have some data binding and
some kind of reactive programming.
It's not really complete,
the reactive part, but it works for
the basic ideas, at least.
So everything in the UI
it's expressed in widgets.
And a widget it's just a Dart class,
that we'd extend from a widget superclass,
okay?
We will see it action in a minute.
And we have a visual editor tool in
Android Studio or in Visual Studio, okay?
Both are okay.
So we are going to,
we can target Android, iOS, iPadOS,
embedded device, Fuchsia OS,
desktop devices, Windows.
This has answered the question
that we had before, win32 and
universal Windows platform, as well.
MacOS, macOS is better at this point,
Linux, okay?
And the web.
So the same the same widgets
that we are going to create
are going to work everywhere.
How does that work, how does magic work?
Well, if you have been in
the cross-platform SDK world,
maybe you have heard about React Native,
for example, or Xamarin or NativeScripts.
Flutter, it's competing in the same group,
but
it's completely different,
let me tell you why.
In React Native or in Xamarin,
when you render Xamarin forms,
actually they're
multi-platform UI framework,
when you create a button on the screen,
okay?
The button instance is using
the UI toolkit from each OS.
So in iOS, it's using UI button,
on Android, it's using the button
from the Android toolkit, on Windows,
it's using a Windows button.
And on the web, if React Native for Web,
for example, you can export to the web,
it's actually creating an HTML button,
okay?
Flutter is doing something different.
Flutter is not using any UI framework
from the operating systems,
it's rendering its own button
in a low level canvas.
So it's rolling the button,
that it will look like pixel perfect
to an Android or
iOS device if you use the right widget.
But it's not actually using their
own UI frameworks, okay, make sense?
So it's more like UC unity.
I mean, from a UI point of view,
it's like having a full canvas where
you can render whatever you want.
But Flutter over that canvas it's actually
render an app that looks like the other
apps in the operating system, but
it was completely written from scratch.
So that means that animation,
transitions, that code was written in
a low level system that emulates the
standard UI toolkit, okay, makes sense?
On the web, we have renderers,
we will talk about that later.
But by default it's rendering in a canvas
or WebGL, so your app render fair.
And you can convert that into
a progressive web app, that's for
the end of today.
You have any question
on the rendering part,
on what's the difference between other
cross-platform frameworks and Flutter?
>> Is it using Skia to
render to the canvas?
>> Internally?
>> Yeah.
>> It has its own system called
Canvas Kit, on the web.
>> On the web, okay.
>> On the web.
So you can then compile for
the Play Store, creating an AAB file,
an Android App Bundle,
to Android and Chromebooks.
For the Amazon AppStore,
and other App Store,
you can create an APK that also
will work on Windows 11 Store.
For the Huawei AppGallery,
you can also create an APK.
For the App Store, you can create an IPA,
an iPhone application.
And for Microsoft Store, you can create
an Universal Windows application, as well.
So for Windows,
you can create an Android app to
distribute that on the Microsoft Store or
you can create a Windows up,
both will work, okay, makes sense?
So as we mentioned before,
it's not using any SDK,
everything is your own widget and design.
And it comes with two widget sets,
ready to use,
material widgets and
Cupertino widgets, okay?
So we pick the one that we want to use.
Cupertino is the iOS-like widget.
And it's weird to use that on Android,
it's weird to use that on the web.
We can, but it looks weird.
So most of the time we prefer,
if you aren't going to do
a multi-platform application,
we prefer Material widget.
So that is more universal,
but it's up to you, okay?
So there are cloning pixel-perfect,
the Android Material Design and
the Apple Human Interface guidelines.
So when you look at a Real Native app and
a Flutter app using that toolkit,
you won't see a lot of differences,
okay, makes sense?
So pixel-perfect, high-performance,
same gestures, same animations,
as the Native toolkits.
So for example, the same app,
using, in this case,
it's the same Material,
Apple running on iOS and an Android.
And you can see, for example,
the buttons look different,
the switch, that little switch
that you can turn on and
off is looking different on
Cupertino than on Material, okay?
So yeah, they're pretty similar.
Or if you look at the plus sign,
there is a plus sign on Android,
it's called the Floating Action Button.
And on iOS they're the same pattern is
to put the plus sign at the top right.
So this is Material and Cupertino.
Can you use both at the same time?
For Android and
the web I wanna use Material, and for
iOS I wanna target Cupertino?
Yes, but it's a problem, because we
are talking about different widgets.
So you need to have some kind
of conditional arrangements, and
also there is a design pattern where you
create some kind of abstract widgets.
You're creating your own abstract button,
then inside we have a conditional saying,
if it's Android or the web, let's use
the material button, if it's iOS or
iPadOS, let's use the Cupertino button.
So if you wanna do that, it's possible,
but it takes more effort in your code.
Most of the time, Flutter application will
use the same UI guideline everywhere,
but it's your decision, yeah?
>> So if you ran the Cupertino on
the Android, it would look like iPhone?
>> It will look like an iPhone and
the user is not expecting that UI, and
the share stores and
everything looks like an iPhone.
It will work because it's not using
the UI from the toolkit from iOS.
It's rendering that from scratch, so
it will look like iOS on Android as well.
But the gestures, the tabs,
how everything looks like, it's different.
So most of the time, Flutter applications
are using the Material widgets or
your own widgets.
You create your own widgets
with your own design, okay?
So for example, this is a Material
app working on both platforms.
So typically it looks nice on both.
So we have to make the decision,
design your own visual pattern system,
use Material for all devices.
Or have that multi-user interface that
makes, you need more effort, okay?
To make that work, just have that in mind.
So it doesn't happen automatically because
widgets are not translatable, okay?
So have in mind, it takes some time.
Today we will just pick Material, we will
make an app in Material, okay, make sense?
So and
then we will have different products.
The iOS application and
the replication and web builder,
web build folder, they have ready to
deploy, we will see that at the end.
And executable for Windows, and APPX for
Windows and macOS application, I'm sorry,
and a macOS application,
or a Linux application, or
a folksy iOS application and
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.